INDICATIONS AND USE OF YAZ

YAZ is the first and only combined oral contraceptive (COC) with three indications. 

YAZ works as a COC that helps reduce the hormonal fluctuations that occur the week before a woman's period.  It contains 3 mg of drospirenone (DRSP) with a lower dose of ethinyl estradiol (EE) (20 mcg) in comparison to Yasmin (30mcg).  It comes in a 24/4 day dosing regimen versus the traditional 21/7 day dosing which results in three additional days of progestin DRSP.  The combination of DRSPs 30 hour half-life with a shorter placebo interval results in anti-mineralcorticoid and anti-androgenic activity throughout a menstrual cycle.

YAZ is the only COC that also is currently approved by the FDA to treat premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), the most severe form of premenstrual syndrome.  PMDD affects about 5% of women and YAZ has proven in clinical trials to reduce PMDD symptoms by at least half.  YAZ is proven effective in treating the mood, physical and behavioral symptoms of PMDD and symptoms specifically associated with food, water retention and negative interpersonal relationships.

YAZ has also been approved in the treatment of moderate acne in women at least 14 years of age, who have no known contraindications to oral contraceptives (OCs) and have achieved menarche.   Acne is a skin disorder with a multifactorial etiology that includes androgen stimulation of sebum production.  While DRSP and EE in combination increase sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) thereby decreasing free testosterone, the exact mechanism whereby these observations decrease the severity of acne in otherwise healthy women has not yet been elucidated. 

PHARMACOTHERAPEUTICS

While there exist a number of different mechanisms by which to interfere with conception (i.e., pills, sterilization, barrier methods, withdrawal, abstinence) and likewise there exist a number of different mechanisms by which to decrease fertility pharmacologically (i.e., preventing ovulation, impairing gametogenesis or gamete maturation, or interfering with gestation) currently interference with ovulation is the most common pharmacologic intervention for preventing pregnancy in the United States.  In 2002, 38 million women (62%) 15-44 years of age were using contraception (“contractors”).  More importantly, 11.6 million women (19%) 15-44 years of age elected to use oral contraception (OC), such that oral contraceptives (OCs) account for approximately 30% of contractors choice.  OC is the method most widely used by women in their teens and 20s, never-married women and women with at least a college degree.
 
Combination oral contraceptives (COCs) contain a combination of estrogen and a progestin and are the most common type of oral contraceptives.   The estrogen component inhibits the release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the anterior pituitary gland, thereby preventing follicular maturation, suppressing ovulation.  The progestin component inhibits the release of luteinizing hormone (LH) from the anterior pituitary, preventing ovulation, thereby preventing implantation in the endometrium.   The progestin also thickens cervical mucus, which impedes the movement of sperm into the uterus. (Figure 1) Combination pills contain a constant low dose of estrogen given over 21 days plus a concurrent low but increasing dose of progestin given over three successive 7-day periods (called the “triphasic regimen”).  The pills taken from 21 days followed by a 7-day withdrawal period to induce menses.  When taken correctly and consistently, combined and progestin-only OCs are more than 99% effective at preventing pregnancy with a relative failure rate of approximately 0.25 (0.1% and 0.5 % respectively).  

Yasmin and YAZ provide an oral contraceptive regimen consisting of 21 and 24 active film coated tablets respectively, each containing 3.0 mg of drospirenone (DRSP) and 0.030 and 0.020 mg of ethinyl estradiol (EE) respectively in addition to 7 and 4 inert film coated tablets respectively.  Drospirenone, while a progestin, is also a spironolactone analogue with anti- mineralocorticoid activity.  Preclinical studies in animals and in vitro have shown that drospirenone has no androgenic, estrogenic, glucocorticoid and anti-glucocorticoid activity. Preclinical studies in animals have also shown that drospirenone has antiandrogen activity.  Absolute bioavailability of DRSP from a single entity tablet is about 76%, while that of EE is approximately 40% largely due to presystemic conjugation and first-pass metabolism.  The extent of absorption for both Yasmin and YAZ following single administration of two tablets each was slower under fed (high fat meal) conditions with the serum Cmax being reduced about 40%.  Yasmin and YAZ are highly protein bound; approximately 98%.  DRSP is metabolized to pharmacologically inactive acidic-DRSP and 4.5-dihydrodrospirenone-3-sulfate; only to a minor extent by CYP3A4 in the liver.  The half-life of DRSP is about 30 hours to be extensively metabolized and excreted slightly higher in feces compared to urine.  EE however, is metabolized primarily by aromatic hydroxylation, but wide varieties of hydroxylated and methylated metabolites are formed (both free and conjugated).  CYP3A4 in the liver is responsible for the 2-hydroxylation which is the major oxidative reaction.  The 2-hydroxy metabolite is then further transformed by methylation and glucuronidation prior to urinary and fecal excretion.  The half-life of EE is about 24 hours.   Both Yasmin and YAZ are therefore contraindicated in patients with hepatic dysfunction or with renal insufficiency.   The latter conditions result in higher mean exposure to DRSP and a potential for hyperkalemia in patients with renal impairment whose serum potassium is in the upper reference range to begin with and who are also using potassium sparing drugs (ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-II receptor antagonists, potassium-sparing diuretics, potassium supplements, heparin, aldosterone antagonists and NSAIDS).  Neither Yasmin nor YAZ should therefore be used in patients with conditions that predispose to hyperkalemia (i.e. renal insufficiency, hepatic dysfunction, adrenal insufficiency).  


Most adverse effects of OCs are believed to be due to the estrogen component, but cardiovascular effects reflect the action of both estrogen and progestin.  The incidence of side effects with OCs is relatively low and is determined by the specific compounds and combination used.  Major adverse effects are breast fullness, depression, dizziness, edema, headache, nausea and vomiting.  The most serious side effect of OCs is cardiovascular disease (i.e. thromboembolism, thrombophlebitis, hypertension, increased incidence of myocardial infarction and cerebral and coronary thrombosis).  These are more common among women who smoke and are over 35 years of age, although they may affect women of any age. OCs decrease the incidence of endometrial and ovarian cancer, and decrease dietary carbohydrate absorption.  The production of benign tumors of the liver that may rupture and hemorrhage is rare.   Moreover, EE causes an increase in HDL and a decrease in LDL; thus, progestin have the opposite effect, norgestrel causing the greatest increase in the LDL/HDL ratio.  Cholestatic jaundice, cholecystitis and cholangitis are also encountered. Finally, with the exception of oral contraceptive users 35 and older who smoke and 40 and older who do not smoke, mortality associated with all methods of birth control is below that associated with childbirth. 

Neither Yasmin nor YAZ should be taken during pregnancy and are discouraged while nursing.  Animal studies of DRSP and EE have demonstrated a dose dependent increase in feminization of male rat fetuses, while in cynomolgous monkeys no such teratogenic or feminization effect at 30 times the human exposure could be observed.  Small amounts of OC steroids have been identified in the milk of nursing mothers, and a few adverse effects on the child have been reported, including jaundice and breast enlargement.  Furthermore, postpartum use of OCs may interfere with lactation by decreasing the quantity and quality of breast milk.  

The following are the most common adverse events reported with use of Yasmin during clinical trials, occurring in >1% which may or may not be related. Such symptoms may include; headache, menstrual disorder, breast pain, abdominal pain, nausea, leukorrheal, flu syndrome, acne, vaginal moniliasis, depression, diarrhea, asthenia, dysmenorrhea, back pain, infection, pharyngitis, intermenstrual bleeding, migraine, vomiting, dizziness, nervousness, vaginitis, sinusitis, cystitis, bronchitis, gastroenteritis, allergic reaction, urinary tract infection, pruritus, emotional lability, surgery, rash, upper respiratory infection.

The most frequent (>1%) treatment-emergent adverse events, listed in descending order, reported with the use of YAZ in the contraception clinical trials, which may or may not be drug-related, included: upper respiratory infection, headache, breast pain, vaginal moniliasis, leucorrhea, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, vaginitis, abdominal pain, flu syndrome, dysmenorrhea, moniliasis, allergic reaction, urinary tract infection, accidental injury, cystitis, tooth disorder, sore throat, infection, fever, surgery, sinusitis, back pain, emotional lability, migraine, suspicious Papanicolaou smear, dyspepsia, rhinitis, acne, gastroenteritis, bronchitis, pharyngitis, skin disorder, intermenstrual bleeding, decreased libido, weight gain, pain, depression, increased cough, dizziness, menstrual disorder, pain in extremity, pelvic pain, and asthenia.

The most frequent (>1%) treatment-emergent adverse events, listed in descending order, reported with the use of YAZ in the PMDD clinical trials, which may or may not be drug-related, included: intermenstrual bleeding, headache, nausea, breast pain, upper respiratory infection, asthenia, abdominal pain, decreased libido, emotional lability, suspicious Papanicolaou smear, nervousness, menorrhagia, pain in extremity, depression, menstrual disorder, migraine, sinusitis, weight gain, vaginal moniliasis, vaginitis, hyperlipidemia, back pain, diarrhea, increased appetite, enlarged abdomen, accidental injury, acne, dysmenorrhea, and urinary tract infection.

The most frequent (>1%) treatment-emergent adverse events, listed in descending order, reported with the use of YAZ in the acne clinical trials, which may or may not be drug-related, included: upper respiratory infection, metrorrhagia, headache, suspicious Papanicolaou smear, nausea, sinusitis, vaginal moniliasis, flu syndrome, menorrhagia, depression, emotional lability, abdominal pain, gastroenteritis, urinary tract infection, tooth disorder, infection, vomiting, pharyngitis, breast pain, dysmenorrhea, menstrual disorder, accidental injury, asthenia, sore throat, weight gain, arthralgia, bronchitis, rhinitis, amenorrhea, and urine abnormality.

POLYPHARMACY

Rifampin increases the metabolism of EE thereby reducing the effectiveness of OCs and increasing the incidence of menstrual irregularities.  Phenobarbital, phenytoin and carbamazepine also increase the metabolism of EE.  Ampicillin, tetracycline and griseofulvin decrease the effectiveness of OCs resulting in an increased incidence of pregnancy when taken together.  St. John’s Wort (Hypercom perforatum) increases CYP450 metabolism of OCs, reducing their effectiveness and increasing the incidence of breakthrough bleeding.  Phenylbutazone

Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) and acetaminophen (Tylenol), possibly by inhibiting conjugation, decrease the metabolism of OCs. Atorvastatin decreases the metabolism of EE resulting in a 20% increased AUC.  

NON-CONTRACEPTIVE HEALTH BENEFITS OF YAZ®

Effects on menses: increased menstrual cycle regularity; decreased blood loss and decreased incidence of iron deficiency anemia; decreased incidence of dysmenorrhea

Effects related to inhibition of ovulation: decreased incidence of functional ovarian cysts; decreased incidence of ectopic pregnancies

Effects from long-term use: decreased incidence of fibro adenomas and fibrocystic disease of the breast; decreased incidence of acute pelvic inflammatory disease; decreased incidence of endometrial cancer; decreased incidence of ovarian cancer.










SOURCES

Mosher WD, Martinez GM, Chandra A, Abma JC, Willson SJ. Use of contraception and use of family planning services in the United States, 1982–2002. Advance data from vital and health statistics; no 350. Hyattsville, Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics. 2004.

YAZ (drospirenone and ethinyl estradiol) Tablets, Product Insert, 2007.
